---
layout: post
title: Libre
author: Eric Miller
category: Technology
tags:
---

If you've ever owned a smartphone, you know a thing or two about free apps. There are lots of them,
flooding the app store of your choice, usually low-quality, sometimes scams, and sometimes
attempting to upsell you on microtransactions (also arguably a scam). And some of them are really
good.

But to many computer scientists and software developers, "free" can have an entirely different
meaning. Many people, namely the GNU (pronounced with a hard 'G') project/organization, have been
thinking about what "free software" might really mean. They define their software as "free", but in
a different sense. The distinction they claim to make is that they mean "free" as in "freedom,
while the people offering apps on the app store mean it in the sense of "free of charge". One of
the particularly interesting aspects of this is the differing definitions of freedom offered, which
to me mirrors a lot of the discussion of freedom going on elsewhere.

When you talk about differing ideologies, one of the key sticking ways they differ is usually the
interpretation of the word "freedom", and the lines drawn about *which* freedoms are important.
In some ways we see these same discussions in the dark corners of
[IRC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Relay_Chat), but like most ideological discussions, it
usually boils down to people shouting through their keyboard at each other because they either for
no real reason.

And it is a discussion worth having – if you look at the development of information technology
(technology used for information, not just computers) over time, the development of computers and
the internet are probably the biggest jump in the shortest period of time, at least since the
invention of writing. So, with such a big change in something so important, it's worth looking at
how the things we've collectively invented might impact our definition of freedom, as well as how
our definitions of freedom might translate onto them.

----

So now that we're getting into it, let's get our terminology straight so we know what we're talking
about. After all, we're talking about two definitions of "free" that are usually interchangeable.
The accepted way of doing this is using "**libre**" to mean "freedom", and "**gratis**" to mean
"free of charge". These words come from latin/romance languages, where they don't have the problem
of having multiple *very* different definitions of the same word.

----

## GNU and the Four Essential Freedoms

GNU stands for "GNU's Not Unix" (programmers like recursive names). It's an organization of
individuals dedicated to some core ideas about what libre software entails, and who believe that
libre software is *ethically* superior to its *proprietary* counterparts. They've had *incredible*
success with their libre software, and are, in my opinion, the core players in that area. They have
four core "Freedoms", whithout which, they say software is not truly "free" (libre).

* The freedom to run the program as you wish, for any purpose (freedom 0).
* The freedom to study how the program works, and adapt it to your needs (freedom 1). Access to the source code is a precondition for this.
* The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help your neighbor (freedom 2).
* The freedom to improve the program, and release your improvements to the public, so that the whole community benefits (freedom 3). Access to the source code is a precondition for this.

Basically these freedoms can be summarized as "The person who made the software lets you do
whatever you want with their software, for whatever, reason, in whatever way." However, the
*particular* phrasing of the last two points can be very important, because it puts qualifiers on
those freedoms.

## Freedom 0

> The freedom to run the program as you wish, for any purpose.

This is probably the simplest, most agreeable, and least controversial of the four freedoms
mentioned here, and it's a very important one. Note that there's a corollary – users have the
freedom to have the program **not** run any of its functionality. Both of these are pretty fair –
you're free to use the software however you want, and the person who made it can't force you to use
or participate in any functionality that you don't want.

A great example of some *gratis* software that doesn't satisfy this is Google's suite of apps,
including email, word processing, spreadsheets, and advertizing. While you can use these apps for
whatever you want *to some extent* (you can't run it on your own server, for example), it also
engages in functionality that it doesn't allow you to turn off. Namely, scrubbing your data for
information to sell to advertizers.

## Freedom 1

> The freedom to study how the program works, and adapt it to your needs. Access to the source code is a precondition for this.

This is pretty straightforward, but it's also arguably a prerequisite for Freedom 0. If you can't
look at how a program works, you have no way of knowing that the program isn't doing something
unsavory when you're not looking. Aside from that, it's absolutely necessary for freedom 3.

The only real controversial part about this is if you're looking at developing software without
making the source code openly available. If you're doing it for profit, you probably don't want to
do this (or follow freedoms 2 or 3 for that matter). However, this does mean that, at this point,
developing libre software and selling it is not possible.

## Freedom 2

> The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help your neighbor.

Again, pretty straightforward, but not very good for people who want to sell their software. If
anyone can redistribute your software, whether for free or for money, you're not getting paid for
your work.

On the other hand, if we look at things in terms of getting maximum *utility* out of the software,
by limiting this freedom you limit the number of people who can use your software, and thus limit
what it can do for the world. Likewise, you create a rule that your customers are expected to
follow, which limits their freedom.

## Freedom 3

> The freedom to improve the program, and release your improvements to the public, so that the whole community benefits. Access to the source code is a precondition for this.

This is basically a combination of freedoms 0 and 2. Basically, if you're not able to make
improvements to software, you're not necessarily able to do whatever you want with it to suit your
needs. Likewise, if you can't then release your changes freely to others, you're heavily limited in
what you can do, and the rules are in violation of the spirit (if not the letter) of Freedom 2.

Something to note: While redistributing something libre as non-libre is illegal, it's not
illegal to use libre software to do something for-profit. So you can use it to host your servers,
you just can't redistribute it in that form.

## The GPL

Ideology in hand, GNU needed a way to give legal standing ground for these freedoms, so that the
software they made would be protected and essentially *forced* to be libre by the legal system. The
naive way to do this would be to release code to the public domain (essentially renounce ownership
and let anyone do anything they want with it), but this runs into problems. One of them is that
while the original software may be free, there is no way to *enforce that freedom* when it's
redistributed. The result of this was the GNU General Public License (or GPL). It's what has become
known as a *copyleft* license (a play on the word copyright). The GPL can be summed up as having
a few basic terms.

* The creator assumes no liability.
* The software is distributed free of charge.
* The software can be used for any (legal) purpose.
* The software can be redistributed in its current form under the sole condition that it is redistributed with the same license (GPL).
* The software can be modified with the condition that any distribution of that modification is done with the same license (GPL).

Those last two points are important, and are critical to the enforcement of the freedoms mentioned
earlier. The last one is particularly important though. What it means is that if you make software
that uses or modifies existing GPL code, your code must also be licensed under GPL. This means that
derivative works cannot be *sold* or the license controlled, preserving the original author's
intent that the software be free-of-charge, open-source, and, ideally, libre.

## Economics

One of the most important concepts in economics is **utility**. Utility is the subjective measure
of how useful something is to a given person. For example, if you watch a movie, you get utility in
the form of enjoyment. Eating a burrito, you get enjoyment and energy in return.

The idea of maximizing utility is arguably one of the core reasons for the GPL. If you're
developing software for free and sharing it, you naturally want other people to get something out
of it if they use it. You want them to get as much as possible out of it, actually. By not allowing
users freedom 0, you limit the utility they get from it. By restricting freedom 2, you limit its
audience, limiting its total utility. By restricting freedom 3, you prevent other software from
limiting those freedoms, also potentially limiting its utility. And finally, by introducing a
barrier to entry in the form of requiring payment, you reduce the audience and limit its utility
that way.

Following that, the way to maximize the utility of what you write would logically (assuming GNU's
premises), would be to use the GPL. Some people (including myself) disagree with this to some
extent, but we can get to that later.

It can be useful to realize that one of the core GNU principles is rooted this deeply in economics,
and to me, it's interesting that such a prominent project is so rooted in a philosophy that is
arguably at odds with capitalist principles, especially considering the success of Linux.

## Linux

Linux is what's called an operating system "kernel". The kernel is what makes the most basic
decisions, deciding what process can run when, allowing processes access to network and disk
resources, and managing the core, important aspects of everything a computer does.

Linux is coupled with the GNU (most of an) operating system to create something relatively
complete. Some people call this GNU/Linux, but most just call it "Linux". Particularly, Linux
comes in lots of different distributions. A linux distribution is a collection of Linux and lots
of other software to make up an operating system that's actually usable. Every Linux distribution
is licensed under the GPL because it includes the Linux kernel, which is licensed under the GPL,
and so it must be licensed under it as well.

Most likely, you've heard of Linux. You may know some computer nerd who keeps talking about it, or
you may know that most servers run it. Maybe you even use it. But there's one thing I'd like to
look at about Linux – it's widespread usage.

Most web servers run on Linux, including the one that this page is hosted on. Facebook is, Google
probably is (I can't say for certain). Most are. Why? The first reason is that Unix-based oeprating
systems are much simpler to administrate (generally speaking) than Windows ones. Since Linux comes
in many different distributions, you can use one that's as fully-featured or as bare-bones as you
need (for servers it's the latter). Windows server requires a minimum of 512MB of RAM and 32GB of
disk space to be able to run. Debian, a Linux distribution, on the other hand, requires only 64MB
(12.5% of what's required for Windows) of RAM and 1GB of disk space (3.1%) to run. 

Why I'm interested in that is because software has become a huge industry. All across the United
States startups and companies are making their own proprietary software – at odds with the GNU
philosophy – and using GNU's greatest success, Linux, to power much of it. The internet, and all
of the capitalist economic power it holds, essentially runs on the work of a lot of people did
based partially on the idea that more utility was maximized by cooperating and lowering barrier to
entry.

Something to think about.
